---
layout: post
category : opinion
title: "On polyphasic sleeping"
comments: true
tags : [sleep]
---

Some time ago, I tried a new way of sleeping. It's called polyphasic sleeping and basically consists of trading core sleep for intermediate naps. The big advantage is that you need overall less sleep than you would need if you'd take a single main period of sleep (called a core sleep). A normal person on average needs about 8 hours of core sleep a day when using a monophasic rhythm. There are 3 main variants of polyphasic sleeping: the siesta, the everyman and the uberman. Every variant is more extreme.<!--more-->

The siesta is a well known concept in hot countries like Spain or Portugal. It was born out of necessity: it was just too hot to work during noon. Their solution: sleep for 30 minutes. The result was that due to this intermediate nap you need less core sleep during the night. From my own experience, by taking a siesta 6 hours of sleep at night was more than enough. Even if you're not a polyphasic sleeper, I recommend this to everyone.

The everyman is an evolution of the siesta. It's basically a siesta with 2 to 4 naps of 20 minutes. Every naps shaves about an hour and a half off your core sleep. So with two naps, you only need 4 hours and 30 minutes (5h10 total). With four naps, this means you should be able to make do with only sleeping an hour and a half at night (2h50 total). While this last case sounds a bit extreme to start with, it only takes your body a couple of weeks (2 to 4) to adjust to the new rhythm regardless of which of the everyman variants you have chosen. 

The most extreme is the uberman, which actually removes core sleep alltogether. Due to this extreme nature, only a small percentage of people are able to adjust to this rhythm. With an uberman schedule, you'll only be sleeping between 2 and 3 hours a day.  

Those familiar with the mechanics of sleep will say that the reason why we need longer periods of sleep is because we need to get into a deep sleep state (SWS or Slow Wave Sleep) and a REM (Rapid Eye Movement) state. Without this you would soon show symptoms of chronic sleep deprivation (anxiety, easily irritated) which is very bad for you and your body (higher risk for cardiac problems and other health issues). However, there are also 2 states of sleep that are basically useless in terms of recovery and which take up more than 60 percent of your total sleep. The point of polyphasic sleep is to minimize these states. The human brain is amazingly adaptable and when you've successfully adapted a polyphasic rhythm, you'll find out you'll enter SWS and REM much, much faster than you would if only doing one core sleep without napping.

I've personally tried the everyman with 3 naps. I went from 8 hours of sleep a night to 3 hours and 3 naps a day. The key to succeeding with this rhythm is creating a schedule. For me, it meant going to sleeping at 12AM until 3AM and napping at 8AM, 1:20PM and 6:40PM. The reasoning behind my schedule was that it should be compatible with my day job. After my first nap, I leave for work, after lunch I take my second nap and when I get home I do my last nap. 

Adjusting to everyman was not easy. I adjusted during my vacation, and it took me 2 weeks to fully adjust to the schedule. In the beginning, keeping to the schedule is extremely important as your brain needs to be conditioned into accepting the new rhythm. But after 2 weeks the results were amazing. Even though I only slept for 4 hours a day I was more awake than ever. And it's ridiculous how much more you can do with 4 more hours in a day. It's great when you're able to cook a fantastic breakfast by the time your girlfriend wakes up. And as far as napping goes: it took me about 2 minutes to be sound asleep.

You're wondering whether I'm still doing this today. Unfortunately, I had to stop a while ago due to becoming a father for the first time. See, babies don't care whether you have a sleep schedule. And I quickly found out than when you deviate too much from the schedule, there are consequences. In only a couple of weeks, my entire body went into a continuous zombie mode and I started oversleeping. And before I knew it, I was back doing monophasic sleep and that's where I'm at right now. 

There are also other downsides to polyphasic sleeping. 
First of all, our society isn't built for polyphasic sleepers, at least not in Belgium. When I got up at 3AM, the only thing I could do were things at home. Shops opened at 9AM, the bakery at 6AM. I couldn't just go out and get the groceries. In the UK, this is actually doable: sone Tesco stores are open 24/7 during the week. Our society isn't built for operating 24/7 and it can be quite frustrating. 
When you're planning a party, you need to take your schedule into account. Everyman allows for some deviation, as long as it's not systematic and you need to adjust your schedule so that you fall back to your original schedule as soon as possible. Doing an all-nighter can wreak havoc, but that's the same as with monophasic sleep.
Last but not least, it's hard to tell your company or client that you're on a different sleeping rhythm. Most of the time, they don't understand or think you're a weirdo. My schedule kind of avoided these hurdles, but when doing a 4 nap schedule, this becomes a lot harder (i.e. sleeping from 2AM till 3:30AM and napping at 7:45AM, 12:20PM, 4:55PM and 9:30PM). Personally I would have gone with this schedule, but I have the occasional afternoon work meeting which makes this very hard. Luckily, my current job is a lot more flexible than my last one, but not all employers provide such flexibility or would allow for someone to sleep for 20 minutes during office hours (mind you, I still worked 8 hours a day not including my naps). It has been proven that allowing naps actually raises productivity, especially in the afternoon. But tell that to the client who's not willing to wait 20 minutes on the phone because the person he wants to talk to urgently is taking a nap.

Does this mean I won't try this again? Absolutely not. I'm planning on resuming this as soon as my son starts to sleep more during the night and has a steady schedule. I miss my 4 hours of extra time awake and the fact that I was a lot more awake than I am most of the time now. In retrospect I could have kept to the everyman schedule, but I didn't want to burden my girlfriend any more than I had to. 

In conclusion, I would recommend everyone to try a polyphasic schedule. Personally, I recommend trying an everyman with 2 or 3 naps if you're a beginner or something even less extreme like a biphasic or triphasic schedule (see [this site](www.polyphasicsociety.com) for more information). I'm convinced that we're not built to sleep 8 hours a day and I can't wait to adjust to my old schedule again.
